# Contribution Guide

This article will help you build, test and try out local builds of the VS test
platform.

## Prerequisites
The development machine should allow execution of powershell scripts. It can be
set with following command in an *Administrator* powershell session:

```powershell
> Set-ExecutionPolicy Unrestricted
```

Please ensure you have a `.net 4.6.2` or higher installed on the machine.

Clone the repository to a local directory. Rest of this article assumes
`/src/vstest` as the location of source enlistment.

```
> git clone https://github.com/Microsoft/vstest.git
```

If you're planning to use **Visual Studio** as development environment, please
install `VS 2015 Update 3` and the `.NET Tools for VS Preview 2`. See download
link [here](https://www.microsoft.com/net/core#windows).

Rest of the article will provide steps for VS and CLI/Editors development.

## Build

### Building with Visual Studio

Open `/src/vstest/TestPlatform.sln` in VS.

Use `Build Solution` to build the source code.

Binaries for each assembly are produced in the
`artifacts/src/<Assembly>/bin/Debug` directory.

### Building with CLI, CI, Editors

To build the repository, run the following command:

```
> cd /src/vstest
> build.cmd
```

This command will fetch the latest `dotnet-cli` into `/src/vstest/tools/dotnet`
directory. It will use the `dotnet` executable present there to build the source
code. All the nuget required for build will be downloaded to
`/src/vstest/packages` directory.

Build will produce following assets:

* A portable `vstest.console` for desktop (net46 target) and xplat (netcoreapp)
  target
* A visual studio extension `Microsoft.TestPlatform.vsix` with the test platform
  components required in VS test explorer
* Test platform SDK packages for ObjectModel and TranslationLayer

We will discuss more on each assets are in the [Deployment](#Deployment) section below.

Binaries for each assembly is produced along side the source. E.g. ObjectModel
assemblies can be found at
`/src/vstest/src/Microsoft.TestPlatform.ObjectModel/bin/Debug/net46/*.dll`.

To build a particular configuration, use the `-c` option. E.g. to trigger a
release build use

```
> build.cmd -c Release
```

For other options, check `/src/vstest/scripts/build.ps1`.

## Test

There are two sets of tests:

* Unit tests
    - Very fast tests primarily validating individual units
    - Named as `<UnitUnderTest>.UnitTests` where UnitUnderTest is any product
        assembly
* Smoke tests
    - Slower end to end tests. Typically these cover P0 scenarios (99% of users
        will use these, if these are broken, PR will not be merged)
    - Driven by a real `vstest.console` executable
    - Named as `Microsoft.TestPlatform.SmokeTests`
* End to end tests
    - Slower end to end tests for extensive coverage
    - Driven by a real `vstest.console` executable
    - Named as `Microsoft.TestPlatform.AcceptanceTests`

As a principle, most of tests are unit tests (~70-80%), few smoke tests
(~20-15%), fewer acceptance tests (~10-5%).

Unit tests and smoke/acceptance tests are run with the `vstest.console` built by
the `build` step above.

### Running tests (Visual Studio)

Currently tests are run in VS 2015 Update 3 using the Project K test adapter. It
requires a workaround. Run the following command before running unit tests:

```
> /src/vstest/scripts/EnableUnitTesting.bat
```

Run the tests in Test Explorer. Use a search filter like `project:"Unit"` to
run only unit tests. For running smoke tests, use the `project:"Smoke"` filter.

At the end of test run, execute the following command to disable the workaround:

```
> /src/vstest/scripts/DisableUnitTesting.bat
```

### Running tests (CLI, CI, Editors)

To execute tests, run the following command:

```
> cd /src/vstest
> test.cmd
```

By default, only unit tests are run. To run the smoke tests, provide the `-p`
option to `test.cmd` to set test assembly pattern:

```
> test.cmd -p smoke
```

The `-p` option can be used to run tests for any assembly as well. E.g.
following command will run tests for *datacollector*:

```
> test.cmd -p datacollector
```

Tests for a particular configuration can be run with following command. By
default, `Debug` configuration is run.

```
> test.cmd -c release
```

## Deployment

This section will discuss the steps to use the `vstest.console` we've built
using previous instructions.

### Visual Studio

VS 2016 installs the test platform `vsix` generated by build.cmd. To use the locally
built version, install
`/src/vstest/artifacts/<Configuration>/TestPlatform.vsix` (replace <Configuration>
with Debug or Release as appropriate).

### Command line (XPlat)

A `netcoreapp` target of vstest.console is dropped at
`/src/vstest/artifacts/<Configuration>/netcoreapp1.0/vstest.console.dll`. It can be
executed with any dotnet executable. You may choose to use the dotnet-cli we
have in `/src/vstest/tools/dotnet/dotnet` as well :)

```
> /src/vstest/tools/dotnet/dotnet /src/vstest/artifacts/Debug/netcoreapp1.0/vstest.console.dll /?
```

### Command line (Windows desktop)

A `net46` target of vstest.console is dropped at
`src/vstest/artifacts/<Configuration>/net46/win7-x64`. It can be run directly as
follows:

```
> /src/vstest/artifacts/Debug/net46/win7-x64/vstest.console.exe /?
```

## Diagnostics

Try to isolate the failure scenario. In the best case it's just a command line
that can demonstrate a bug. For example, a bug in discovery of tests can show up
in following command line:

```
> /src/vstest/artifacts/Debug/net46/win7-x64/vstest.console.exe mytest.dll /listTests /tests:*&&*#Ed
```

Next step is to enable verbose logging (TBD) to understand details.

Another add a `Debugger.Launch` at the process launch points. E.g.
`testhost.exe` or `vstest.console.exe`. Select the appropriate debugger (choose
CoreCLR for netcoreapp scenario) and step through the code.
